So part five, six and seven are basically
each of them are going to introduce
the three main concepts of rusts
automatic memory management system.
Those concepts are ownership,
borrowing and lifetimes.
We start with ownership and and
first learn how that works.
Then in the next section we'll
talk about borrowing and
then finally we'll end with lifetimes.
Cool, so first, we're gonna talk
about manual memory management.
Then we're gonna talk about
automatic memory management,
then ownership and finally cloning.
Okay, so
we previously talked about the heap and
how when we want to make a vec full of
nums that are gonna live on the heap.
We call this vecmacro, and it's going
to actually store them inside the heap.
What's gonna go on the stack is something
more like this VecMetadata struct, we're
gonna have the first element index which
is going to be where this one is stored.
And then the length which will be three
the capacity which is gonna be at least
three but might be bigger than that.
In this case the vec macro will
set the capacity to be three but
these things are going to
live on the actual heap.
Okay, so let's talk a little bit
more specifically about that he
bookkeeping that we were talking about.
So basically whenever the vec macro gets
run it calls a function called alloc which
is short for allocate.
You may hear the term allocation used to
refer to like sort of reserving memory.
Allocation can refer to the stack or
the heap but typically speaking,
whenever people talk about allocations
if they're not more specific than that,
they usually mean heap allocations.
It's a common technique in
performance optimization to say,
reduce allocations and when people say
that they mean reduced heap allocations
cuz they can be kinda expensive.
This alloc function actually takes a non
trivial amount of time to run depending on
like what's been going on in your program.
So basically what its job is to say find
three unused heat bytes in a row and
mark them as in use.
So when this happens, this is not
something that's built into the hardware.
Like the computer does not have
a concept of a stack or a heap.
It just has ones and zeros and
instructions for doing like arithmetic and
things like that.
So when you run this function,
it's actually running a non
trivial amount of logic.
It's got an actual data
structure in memory.
This alloc function does like a global
data structure that's storing these
indices of which things are available and
which things are in use.
When you call it,
it's actually doing work to traverse
this data structure like it's
like a potentially a big tree and
actually find out where
the next available thing is.
Especially when you get
into concurrency and stuff.
This can be quite time consuming,
so let's say that it comes back,
alloc returns it says okay,
I found three unused e bytes in a row.
Great, here they are.
I'm going to mark them in my
alloc data structure as in use.
So next time you ask me I'll remember
not to give you these things.
But there's a reasonable question
to ask here which is okay,
how does it know when
they're no longer in use?
I guess one of the important points of
this bookkeeping system is we ask it for
three bytes that are not in use.
Okay, fine when I call alloc
it marks them as in use, but
how does it know when to mark
them as no longer in use?
So this is not a problem
that we had on the stack,
on the stack we just had that stack
length that gets higher and lower and
then that's sort of how you
know as you call the function.
Once the function is over, well,
we can move the stack back on all
the remaining bytes become garbage.
But on the heap, it's different.
On the heap, the question of when is this
thing no longer in use is non trivial.
It's it's not obvious.
Well, this is where we get into
the concept of manual memory management.